Add guidance for dealing with Bluetooth interference (#23688)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_integrations/bluetooth.markdown

Following all these optimization tips below should significantly improve the reception of your Bluetooth radio adapter. The below insights describe working around the well-known limitations of low-power 2.4 GHz digital radio. It can resolve or avoid many known issues caused by interference or poor placement of your Bluetooth radio adapter or devices.

Computers, peripherals, and devices generate [electromagnetic interference (also known as EMI/EMI/RMI)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_interference), which can interfere with signals transmissions on the 2.4 GHz radio band frequency, and degrade the wireless communication with your Bluetooth adapter/devices.

For example, unshielded USB 3 port and their cables are especially infamously known to affect 2.4 GHz radio reception. Place your Bluetooth adapter far away as possible from any potential sources of EMI/EMI/RMI by using a long, adequately shielded USB extension cable.

#### Simple actions that should improve most Bluetooth setups and common root causes of interference

- Bluetooth adapter hardware:
  - Bad performance from old/outdated Bluetooth adapter hardware or poor Bluetooth adapter antenna:

>     - Buy and use a (good quality) Bluetooth USB adapter based on newer/modern chip hardware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Buy and use a supported Bluetooth USB adapter based on newer/modern chip hardware.
```

>       - Consider a Bluetooth adapter that has an external antenna. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - Consider a Bluetooth adapter that has an external antenna.
```

      - While older adapters might work, they could have obsolete hardware or old firmware, which prevents reliable operation.
  - Poor or outdated Bluetooth adapter firmware on the Bluetooth adapter:

>     - Update to a later released Bluetooth chip firmware on the Bluetooth adapter. Updating firmware is usually straightforward if the manufacturer or the chip maker provides one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Update to the latest Bluetooth chip firmware on the Bluetooth adapter. Updating firmware is usually straightforward if the manufacturer or the chip maker provides one.
```

- Bluetooth adapters are RFI sensitive and can be very susceptible to all types of EMI/EMF interference:

>   - Poor placement of the Bluetooth adapter and/or wrong orientation of Bluetooth adapter antenna:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Poor placement of the Bluetooth adapter or wrong orientation of Bluetooth adapter antenna:
```

>     - Use a long USB extension cable to place Bluetooth adapter away from interference and obstacles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Use a long USB extension cable to place the Bluetooth adapter away from interference and obstacles.
```

>       - Make sure the USB extension cable has proper shielded (thick cables usually have this).
>         - Preferably by a longer extension cable specified to have proper shielding and ferrite clamps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - Ensure the USB extension cable is adequately shielded (thick cables usually have this).
```

>         - Using a USB extension cable also make it easier to orient the Bluetooth adapter/antenna.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - A USB extension cable makes orienting the Bluetooth adapter/antenna easier.
```

>     - Try different physical placement and orientations of Bluetooth adapter or its antenna:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Try different physical placement and orientations of the Bluetooth adapter or its antenna:
```

>       - Optimal placement of Bluetooth adapter is as much in middle of the house as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - The optimal placement of the Bluetooth adapter is close to the middle of the house as possible.
```

>       - Try to place the Bluetooth adapter at some distance way from walls, ceilings and floors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - Try to place the Bluetooth adapter at some distance away from walls, ceilings, and floors.
```

>       - Try different orientations of the adapters external antenna (or whole Bluetooth adapter).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - Try different orientations of the adapter's external antenna (or whole Bluetooth adapter).
```

  - USB 3.0 ports/computers/peripherals are known culprits of RFI/EMI/EMF disruption. (See Ref. [1](https://www.usb.org/sites/default/files/327216.pdf) and [2](https://www.unit3compliance.co.uk/2-4ghz-intra-system-or-self-platform-interference-demonstration/)).
    - Make sure to only connect the Bluetooth USB adapter to a USB 2.0 port (and not to a USB 3.x port). 
      - If your computer only has a USB 3.x port then connect the adapter via a powered USB 2.0 hub:

>         - A USB 2.0 hub will convert USB 3.0 to a USB 2.0 port and thus you avoid USB 3.0 EMF.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - A USB 2.0 hub will convert USB 3.0 to a USB 2.0 port and avoid USB 3.0 EMF.
```

>           - USB 2.0 hub that use an external power supply ensure power requirements is fulfilled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          - A USB 2.0 hub that uses an external power supply will ensure power requirements are fulfilled.
```

>     - Shield to unshielded computers/peripherals/devices by adding all-metal enclosures/chassis/casings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Shield any unshielded computers/peripherals/devices by adding all-metal enclosures/chassis/casings.
```

      - Single-board-computers and USB 3.x hard drives are especially known as source of EMF/EMI/RFI.

>         - Be aware metal casings can decrease performance of internal/built-in Bluetooth adapters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - Be aware metal casings can decrease the performance of internal/built-in Bluetooth adapters.
```

>       - Also be sure to use properly shielded USB cables for any such peripherals/devices too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - Also, be sure to use adequately shielded USB cables for any such peripherals/devices too.
```

>   - 2.4 GHz RF Interference (RFI) from Wi-Fi Routers and Wi-Fi Access Points, or other type of devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - 2.4 GHz RF Interference (RFI) from Wi-Fi Routers and Wi-Fi Access Points or other devices:
```

  - 2.4 GHz Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) from Wi-Fi Routers and Wi-Fi Access Points, or others.
  - While unsual as Bluetooth is designed to coexist with Wi-Fi, their stronger signal can interfere.

>   - To play it safe best is to try to place your Bluetooth adapter awasy from Wi-Fi access-points.

Reviewer: Some of this is redundant with the above section. Can you make it a bit more succinct?

Author: Do you mean removing the whole bullet point list and instead extend this above section? "**_Most important is to know that other devices that also broadcast on the 2.4 GHz radio band, like USB3 devices (and their cable connections), or other devices are known to affect Bluetooth radio reception. Especially external SSD drives with USB3 cables are known to block the Bluetooth signal. Also, metal casings can decrease the Bluetooth performance of internal Bluetooth Adapters. Recommendation is therefore to at least place USB3 devices and their cables (SSD, etc.) as far away as possible from your Bluetooth adapter, e.g., by using your Bluetooth adapter with a long extension cable that has proper shielding._**"

Reviewer: I'm mostly concerned about the duplication between

#### Simple actions that should improve most Bluetooth setups
and 
#### Understanding common root causes of problems in Bluetooth radio setups

The first section has `USB 3.0 ports/peripherals are infamously known to cause EMI/EMF interference.`

the second section has `USB 3.0 ports and computer peripherals are known culprits of EMI/EMF disrupting. Ref. [1](https://www.usb.org/sites/default/files/327216.pdf) and [1](https://www.unit3compliance.co.uk/2-4ghz-intra-system-or-self-platform-interference-demonstration/).`

Author: So maybe merge into a single large bullet point list and as such removing the whole second section is better? Like this:

#### Simple actions that should improve most Bluetooth setups and common root causes of interference to be aware of

- Bluetooth adapter hardware:
  - Bad performance from old/outdated Bluetooth adapter hardware or poor Bluetooth adapter antenna.
    - Buy and use a (good quality) Bluetooth USB adapter based on a newer/modern chip hardware.
      - If possible consider buying/upgrading to a Bluetooth adapter that has an external antenna. 
      - While older adapters might work they could have obsolete hardware and/or old firmware.
  - Poor or outdated Bluetooth adapter firmware on the Bluetooth adapter.
    - Update to a later released Bluetooth chip firmware on the Bluetooth adapter.
      - Updating firmware is usually easy if one is provide by the manufacturer or the chip maker.
- Bluetooth adapters are RFI sensitive and can be very susceptible to all types of EMI/EMF interference:
  - Poor placement of the Bluetooth adapter and/or wrong orientation of Bluetooth adapter antenna.
    - Use a long USB extension cable to place Bluetooth adapter away from interference and obstacles.
      - Make sure the USB extension cable has proper shielded (thick cables usually have this).
        - Preferably by a longer extension cable specified to have proper shielding and ferrite clamps.
        - Using a USB extension cable also make it easier to orient the Bluetooth adapter/antenna.
    - Try different physical placement and orientations of Bluetooth adapter or its antenna.
      - Optimal placement of Bluetooth adapter is as much in middle of the house as possible.
      - Try to place the Bluetooth adapter at some distance way from walls, ceilings and floors.
      - Try different orientations of the adapters external antenna (or whole Bluetooth adapter).
  - USB 3.0 ports/computers/peripherals are known culprits of RFI/EMI/EMF disruption. (See Ref. [1](https://www.usb.org/sites/default/files/327216.pdf) and [2](https://www.unit3compliance.co.uk/2-4ghz-intra-system-or-self-platform-interference-demonstration/)).
    - Make sure to only connect the Bluetooth USB adapter to a USB 2.0 port (and not to a USB 3.x port). 
      - If your computer only has a USB 3.x port then connect the adapter via a powered USB 2.0 hub.
        - A USB 2.0 hub will convert USB 3.0 to a USB 2.0 port.
        - Buy a USB 2.0 hub that has an external power supply to ensure fulfil power requirements.
    - Shield close unshielded computers and unshielded peripherals by using metal enclosures/chassis.
      - Single-board-computers and USB 3.x hard drives are especially known as source of EMI/EMF.
      - Also be sure to use properly shielded USB cables for any such peripherals/devices too.
  - 2.4 GHz RF Interference (RFI) from Wi-Fi Routers and Wi-Fi Access Points, or other type of devices.
    - While unusual as Bluetooth is designed to coexist with Wi-Fi, their stronger signal can interfere.
      - To play it safe best to try to place your Bluetooth adapter away from Wi-Fi access-points.
    - Place away from electrical/power wires/cables and power supplies and even household appliances.

Reviewer: Yes thats better.

Author: OK thanks for the feedback, updated now.

>     - While unusual as Bluetooth is designed to coexist with Wi-Fi, their stronger signal can interfere.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - While Bluetooth is designed to coexist with Wi-Fi, its stronger signal can interfere.
```

>       - To play it safe best to try to place your Bluetooth adapter away from Wi-Fi access-points.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - To play it safe, try to place your Bluetooth adapter away from Wi-Fi access points.
```

>     - Place away from any electrical/power wires/cables, power supplies, and household appliances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Place Bluetooth adapters far away from electrical/power wires/cables, power supplies, and household appliances.
```

## Bluetooth interference with other devices

> Poor signal quality or sources of interference for radios can lead to transmission/reception loss or connection problems and show symptoms such as or errors/failures when sending and/or receiving Bluetooth messages that can cause significant degradation in performance. Below are some basic but essential tips for how to get a good setup starting point to achieve an overall better signal quality + better coverage and longer range, as well as some fundamental background information on root causes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sources of interference for radios can lead to transmission/reception loss or connection problems and show symptoms such as errors/failures when sending and receiving Bluetooth messages that can cause significant degradation in performance. Below are some basic but essential tips for getting a good setup starting point to achieve better signal quality, coverage, and extended range.
```

> Following all these optimization tips below should significantly improve reception of your Bluetooth radio adapter and can resolve or avoid many known issues caused by a interference or poor placement of your Bluetooth radio adapter or devices. The most important knowledge this tries to impart relates to the basics on working around the well known limitations of low-power 2.4 GHz digital radio.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following all these optimization tips below should significantly improve the reception of your Bluetooth radio adapter. The below insights describe working around the well-known limitations of low-power 2.4 GHz digital radio. It can resolve or avoid many known issues caused by interference or poor placement of your Bluetooth radio adapter or devices.
```

> Most important is to understand and keep in mind that that other computers/peripherals/devices unintentially or intentionally generate [electromagnetic interference (also known as EMI/EMI/RMI)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_interference) as blocking radio signals transmissions on on the 2.4 GHz radio band frequency, which in practice acts as radio jammers that block the wireless communication to and from your Bluetooth adapter/devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Computers, peripherals, and devices generate [electromagnetic interference (also known as EMI/EMI/RMI)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_interference), which can interfere with signals transmissions on the 2.4 GHz radio band frequency, and degrade the wireless communication with your Bluetooth adapter/devices.
```

> For example, unshielded USB 3.x computers/peripherals/devices and their cables are especially infamously known to affect 2.4 GHz radio reception. The general recommendation is therefore to add all-metal shielding to computers/peripherals/devices or at the very least try to place your Bluetooth adapter far away as possible from any potential sources of EMI/EMI/RMI (e.g., by connecting your Bluetooth adapter via a long USB extension cable that has proper shielding).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, unshielded USB 3 port and their cables are especially infamously known to affect 2.4 GHz radio reception. Place your Bluetooth adapter far away as possible from any potential sources of EMI/EMI/RMI by using a long, adequately shielded USB extension cable.
```

Reviewer: This advice appears at least 3 times on this page.

> #### Simple actions that should improve most Bluetooth setups and common root causes of interference to be aware of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Simple actions that should improve most Bluetooth setups and common root causes of interference
```

- Bluetooth adapter hardware:
  - Bad performance from old/outdated Bluetooth adapter hardware or poor Bluetooth adapter antenna:

>     - Buy and use a (good quality) Bluetooth USB adapter based on a newer/modern chip hardware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Buy and use a (good quality) Bluetooth USB adapter based on newer/modern chip hardware.
```

>       - If possible consider buying/upgrading to a Bluetooth adapter that has an external antenna. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - Consider a Bluetooth adapter that has an external antenna. 
```

>       - While older adapters might work they could have obsolete hardware and/or old firmware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - While older adapters might work, they could have obsolete hardware or old firmware, which prevents reliable operation.
```

  - Poor or outdated Bluetooth adapter firmware on the Bluetooth adapter:

>     - Update to a later released Bluetooth chip firmware on the Bluetooth adapter.
>       - Updating firmware is usually easy if one is provide by the manufacturer or the chip maker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Update to a later released Bluetooth chip firmware on the Bluetooth adapter. Updating firmware is usually straightforward if the manufacturer or the chip maker provides one.
```
